---
title: X-Plane Setup
date: 2023-11-08:00:00:00
description: Messing around with X-Plane plugins
---

X-Plane has an incredible community of developers and hobbyists who create
extensions for the simulator. There are tons of paid options out there of
course, but the folks who do it for free are really what makes this community
special. It offers the opportunity to create custom aircraft, scenery, utility
plugins, and functionality. In this post I'll review some of my favorite
aircraft, plugins and scenery extensions that I've found and actively use.

### Aircraft:

Aircraft can make or break the experience you have in the simulator. Don't get
me wrong, Laminar has some beautiful default aircraft — the C172 and B737, among
others, are extremely well made. But if you're going to spend hours and hours in
the simulator, you should invest in a few high-fidelity aircraft.

#### Zibo B737-800X

The Zibo Mod for the Laminar 737-800 is one of the best (if not the best)
freeware aircraft I've ever seen. It's based on the Laminar Research default
737-8, but adds a whole layer of realism that the default aircraft simply don't
have. Included is a re-texture of the cockpit, upgrades to the FMC, much better
sounds, and more. It also includes tons of datarefs and commands for home
cockpit builders, if that's your thing. Here's the
[link](https://forums.x-plane.org/index.php?/forums/topic/138974-b737-800x-zibo-mod-info-installation-download-links/)
if you're interested. I highly recommend this to anyone getting started in
X-Plane 11 or 12.

#### Dash 8 Q400 (Q4XP)

The other study-level aircraft in my fleet at the moment is the Dash 8 Q400.
It's a fun little propeller plane that I intend to use for shorter regional
flights. I haven't had a ton of time to fly it yet, but I'm looking forward to
it when I make the time. The plane is very well made and the attention to detail
is excellent. You can find out more about the Q4XP
[here](https://www.flyjsim.com/q4xp), it's available for $79.95.

### Plugins:

Plugins can make your experience in the simulator more pleasurable and save you
lots of time and effort. Whether it's automating pushback, adding more realistic
sounds and effects, or connecting to external software, there's a ton of little
tweaks you can make to improve your experience.

#### Better Pushback

I don't know what I'd do without this plugin. To be honest, I think I used to
just start the sim with engines running and use thrust reversers out of the gate
area. This one is a no-brainer. It allows you to draw a pushback path from your
aircraft's current position and set multiple checkpoints along the way. You can
then call the tug whenever you're ready. It automatically chooses the
appropriate size tug based on your aircraft. Best of all, it's free. Check it
out [here](https://github.com/skiselkov/BetterPushbackC/releases).

#### SimCoders HeadShake

Another free plugin that adds a ton of realism to the simulator. This is a
massive improvement over the default camera. Different physical situations can
effect how the camera moves, including piston engine revolutions, tilting your
camera left or right when taxiing, and G-Force effects when flying. This plugin
really makes it feel like you're "part" of the aircraft. Get it from
[SimCoders](https://www.simcoders.com/headshake/headshake/).

#### X-Camera

X-Camera is a massive improvement over the default camera system in X-Plane. It
allows you to set infinite views and save them to certain IDs. These IDs can
then be bound in the X-Plane keyboard settings. I have 5 or 6 cameras set up for
each aircraft and bound to buttons on my joystick. This way I can jump between
the Captain's view, FMC, Tablet, Overhead, and Lower Pedestal. It also
integrates with Headshake and XPRealistic, and allows these plugins to be
disabled for certain camera views. Get it from
[Stick and Rudder Studios](https://stickandrudderstudios.com/x-camera/). It's
free for a limited version or $18 for the complete plugin.

#### XPRealistic

XPRealistic v2 is a paid plugin that includes numerous sound and physical
effects to increase the immersion of the simulator. It can simulate damage in an
overspeed condition, includes improved sounds for different aircraft systems,
and more. It evne has a feature that will cause you to sneeze randomly, though I
disabled that after testing it out. A great plugin that installs easy and gets
out of your way, and really adds to the quality of your simulation. You can get
it on [X-Plane.org](https://store.x-plane.org/XPRealistic-v2_p_1241.html) for
$34.99.

#### XChecklist

Another gem from the community, XChecklist helps you follow the correct
procedure for starting, taxiing, taking off, cruising, descending, landing, and
more in any aircraft. It includes a speaking "copilot" that instructs you to
complete certain tasks and listens for those tasks to be complete using
datarefs. I love using this in the Zibo 737 especially on departure to make sure
I complete each task on the checklist. There are tons of community-made
checklists out there for this plugin for any aircraft you might need. After all,
this plugin has been around since before v10. You can download it for free from
[X-Plane.org](https://forums.x-plane.org/index.php?/files/file/20785-xchecklist-linwinmac/).

#### X-RAAS

X-RAAS is a plugin that simulates the Honeywell Runway Awareness and Advisory
System. It creates visual and audio cues when approaching runways both on ground
and in the air, lining up on a runway, handling a rejected takeoff, passing the
transition altitude, entering the transition altitude, and more. This adds
another layer of realism to the simulation as pilots in certain aircraft will
have this system available to them. I have this plugin installed in my Zibo
737-800X. You can download it for free from
[X-Plane.org](https://forums.x-plane.org/index.php?/files/file/36360-x-raas-runway-awareness-and-advisory-system/).

#### Landing Rate

A simple, free, informative plugin for X-Plane. Landing rate displays a popup on
screen after you complete a landing with a rating. It takes in various different
values like descent rate at touchdown, nose gear rotation rate, and more into
account. Not much more to this one. Check it out on
[X-Plane.org](https://forums.x-plane.org/index.php?/files/file/43586-a-new-landing-rate-display/)
for free.

#### Little XPConnect

Pretty straight forward. I have a program on my laptop called Little Navmap that
I can use to view flight progress, create flight plans, and more. It's
compirable to Navigraph but it's free, so it's a decent option if you're not
looking to pay $10/month. This plugin connects to Little Navconnect which
communicates with Little Navmap over a LAN connection.
[Little XPConnect](https://github.com/albar965/littlexpconnect) —
[Little Navmap](https://albar965.github.io/littlenavmap.html) —
[Little Navconnect](https://albar965.github.io/littlenavconnect.html)

#### STKPConnector

This plugin is used to communicate with SimToolKitPro. More on this later,
[here's](https://simtoolkitpro.co.uk/download) the download.

#### WebFMC

This is a neat little tool to provide a web UI for interacting with your
aircraft's FMC. I have used it on my iPad a few times to get the FMC set up for
a flight while reading out my SimBrief OFP. It's free and it can't hurt, check
it out [here](https://forums.x-plane.org/index.php?/files/file/43314-webfmc/).

### Scenery:

#### World Wind Turbines

This scenery pack adds dry land and offshore wind turbines according to
real-life map data. It's a pretty simple and affordable plugin to add just a
little more accuracy to the simulator. It's available on
[X-Plane.org](https://store.x-plane.org/World-Wind-Turbines-XP12-XP11_p_1668.html)
for $9.99.

#### USA VFR Cellular Towers

This is another affordable scenery pack that includes additional accurate
landmark data, in this case for cell towers. It's $13.99 and can't hurt to have
more accurate scenery data. Pick it up from
[X-Plane.org](https://store.x-plane.org/USA-VFR-Cellular-Towers-XP12_p_1633.html).

#### USA VFR Radio and TV Antennas

I am here once again to tell you about a relatively cheap plugin that adds
additional landmarks to increase the realism of your simulator. There's not a
whole lot more to say on this subject. You can buy it on
[X-Plane.org](https://store.x-plane.org/USA-VFR-Radio-and-TV-Antennas-for-XP12-11_p_1649.html).

#### Airport Enhancement Package

Airport Enhancement Package includes updated textures and assets to improve all
the default airports in the simulator. It replaces buildings, static objects,
runway lights, vegetation, and more. It also includes regionalized assets to
create uniqueness for each airport. This is a no-brainer given that while
spending time doing ground operations, your simulation should be as accurate as
possible.

#### X-World

X-World is a free scenery pack that you should absolutely install for at least
the continent you primarily fly in. I've got X-World America installed since I
almost exclusively fly inside the US. It improves upon building placement,
style, and heights over the default X-Plane scenery. They use real-world data
from Microsoft to place these buildings across the map.

The only gripe I have is that there's now a power line going through the middle
of RW4/RW22 at KROC — if anyone knows how to fix this please email me. It's in
the footer of this site. All in all, a great little tool. And you can't beat
free. Here's the [link](https://simheaven.com/xp12-sceneries/).

#### AutoOrtho

AutoOrtho is awesome. It can be a bit buggy at times, but it really changes the
entire simulation experience once you get it working. AutoOrtho enables you to
stream map data into the simulator to create Orthographic scenery based on real
life. My only advice here is to check that your scenery_packs.ini is configured
properly. I had issues that were exacerbated by the workaround necessary to get
X-RAAS to function properly in X-Plane 12. Anyways, you should definitely check
out AutoOrtho. You can get a lot of the benefits of Ortho4XP without sacrificing
the disk space. Find out more about it
[here](https://github.com/kubilus1/autoortho).

### Software:

#### Little Navconnect

Little Navconnect allows X-Plane to communicate with Little Navmap on another
computer. I sometimes use Little Navmap to monitor a flight's progress when I'm
on autopilot. Though lately I've been using Navigraph mostly.

#### Simbrief Downloader

Simbrief Downloader automatically downloads Operational Flight Plans generated
in Simbrief and saves them to your specified locations. I have it configured to
save my OFPs to the X-Plane FMS plans directory. This allows me to generate a
flight plan in Simbrief and immediately activate that route in the FMC in
X-Plane.

#### Navigraph FMS Data Manager

Because I pay about $10/month to Navigraph for navigational data for my
simulator, I get access to the latest AIRACs as soon as they are available. This
is important to have the most accurate navigation data available. Navigraph FMS
Data Manager will download the latest AIRAC and place it in the necessary
folders. I have it set to update X-Plane and SimToolKitPro.

#### Navigraph Simlink

In order to connect to your simulator over the network, Navigraph Simlink must
be running on your simulator computer. I have it set up to start on boot so that
I never have to think about it. Then, I just open up X-Plane and open Naivgraph
Charts on my iPad and everything is automatically synced up.

#### SimToolKitPro

SimToolKitPro is an EFB that supports numerous simulators and allows you to
import OFPs from SimBrief. It also integrates with VATSIM and IVAO, which I
found really neat. It can help you keep track of ATC coverage while underway. It
also includes a logbook of your flights and hours spent in each airframe.

#### XOrganizer

XOrganzier helps you manage scenery, plugins, aircraft, and your X-Plane
preferences. I primarily use it to automate the maintenance of the
scenery_packs.ini file. If you have things in the wrong order here, you risk
certain objects missing from the simulator or possibly worse. With XOrganizer,
this is one less thing you have to think about. It's a great tool, and for $15
on [X-Plane.org](https://store.x-plane.org/xOrganizer-v3-XP12_p_1636.html), you
really can't go wrong.

External:

#### Little Navmap

Little Navmap is basically a miniature free version of Navigraph. If you don't
have the money to subscribe to Navigraph, or simply don't need all of its
features, check out
[Little Navmap](https://albar965.github.io/littlenavmap.html). It's free, it's
open-source (which I love), and it supports a lot of use-cases.

#### Navigraph Charts

Navigraph charts is a multifaceted app that is included in my ~$10/month
Navigraph subscription. It includes up-to-date real-life navigation data from
Jeppesen including departure plates, arrival plates, airport diagrams, and more.
I usually create a flight plan in Simbrief and then import it into Charts to
determine my departure runway and procedure, as well as my arrival runway and
procedure. I also use the Navigraph Simlink application to overlay my aircraft's
current location over my flight plan. I would highly recommend subscribing to
Navigraph if you're looking to take IFR flying seriously in the simulator. Read
more about Navigraph's products [here](https://navigraph.com/products).

#### SimBrief

Simbrief is a free flight planning tool that can be used for a multitude of
things. It can provide a full Operational Flight Plan with weight and fuel
calculations, takeoff climb and cruise calculations, route planning, and more.
This is a must have for any serious simmer. Check it out
[here](https://dispatch.simbrief.com/home).

### Notes

This is accurate as of early November, 2023. I've spent the better part of my
free time in the past 2-3 weeks honing in on the ultimate experience in
X-Plane 12. There are additional plugins and sceneries that I am exploring, but
I intend to do that at my own pace and update this article if necessary.

Things I still want to look into:

- Global Forests v2 (improved vegetation scenery)
- Mission Generator (gives you something to do)
- Better ground handling, JAR/SAM (improved ground services models)
- XFirstOfficer (abstract away some of the checklist execution)
- Getting a 757 for the simulator, I love the 737 but I also want to fly
  something just a little bit bigger
